CDQAI file version: 2.3.5
HOW TO RUN CDQAI
Crash Data Quality AI - Windows user guide
Prepared for version 2.3.5

WHAT THIS TOOL DOES

PRINT SELECTED CRASHES TO PDF
Check Flag for review beside each desired crash. Flags synchronize between Top
Actionable Findings and All Findings and survive filtering/sorting during the
current page session. Click Print flagged crashes / Save as PDF, then choose
Save as PDF or Microsoft Print to PDF in the browser print dialog. Only selected
crashes appear, once each, including full available narratives and highlights.
Allow the local report pop-up if your browser blocks it. Enable background
graphics in print settings to retain yellow highlighting. Keep the dashboard
and its narrative companion JavaScript file together. No notes are collected.
Reloading or closing the dashboard clears flags. Saved PDFs contain protected
information and must remain in your approved local environment.

NARRATIVE HIGHLIGHTS IN VERSION 2.3.5
Run Run_CDQAI.bat to regenerate the dashboard, then expand a finding. Yellow
segments identify exact rule matches or model sentence sensitivity. Hover for
the reason. Model sentence review covers the top 20 qualifying narrative rows;
not every finding will have highlights. See docs/NARRATIVE_HIGHLIGHTS.md.

TROUBLESHOOTING LOCAL MODELS AND WARNINGS
Check_Local_Llama.bat tests llama3:latest with fabricated evidence only. It does
not load your private configuration or crash data, and omits the generated text.
Its test timeout is 60 seconds. Configure_CDQAI.bat now sets the production
timeout to 180 seconds; rerun setup once to apply that setting locally.
Draft validation failures affect that finding only; service failures stop further
requests. The dashboard now identifies timeout versus rejected draft failures.

CDQAI runtime uses Hugging Face models offline, without Hub calls or telemetry.
If the embedding model is missing, obtain it separately before a data run. New
installers may run this in the project folder during approved model installation:
.venv\Scripts\python.exe -c "from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer; SentenceTransformer('sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2')"
This downloads model assets without reading crash records. An HF token is not
needed for offline processing. Reference: https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/en/package_reference/environment_variables

The missing-narrative warning counts findings without text in the joined dataset.
It does not prove all are source omissions. Check narrative year coverage and
identifier matching privately, particularly after moving to the 2021-2025 period.

CONFIGURE OPTIONAL FEATURES
Double-click Configure_CDQAI.bat and confirm the local setup. Accept the default
llama3:latest tag if that is your installed model. The helper enables Rec03 for
2021-2025, selects Bill.dbo.NarrativesRepaired, preserves connection and narrative
column settings, and backs up private config
under outputs/private-config-backups. It does not load crash data.
If instructed, quit Ollama from the taskbar, reopen it from Start, and run the
setup again. Wait for "Llama guidance enabled" before expecting Llama drafts.
Then run Run_CDQAI.bat. New cache names avoid reusing the previous-period cache.
Changing the narrative source also selects fresh merged and embedding cache names.
Narratives absent from SQL Server, including unavailable 2025 records, remain missing.
Ollama remains optional. New installers can install it from https://ollama.com/download/windows
and obtain an approved local Llama model before using this helper. It performs
no installation or model download. Local-only setup reference:
https://docs.ollama.com/faq#how-do-i-disable-ollama-cloud-features

Optional person injury reconciliation: see docs/PERSON_SEVERITY.md for setup.
This check preserves Rec01 KABCO, keeps injury code 09 unresolved, and writes
person_severity_review.csv locally. It is disabled until configured. Refresh
the crash cache when changing source tables or comparing updated records.

CDQAI checks crash records for missing information, possible contradictions,
and unusual patterns. It creates a dashboard and a ranked list for an analyst
to review. A high score is a reason to investigate, not proof of an error.

You do not need to know Python to use an installation that is already set up.
The normal starting point is the file named Run_CDQAI.bat.

IMPORTANT: KEEP PROTECTED DATA PRIVATE

Server-sourced data and local crash inputs are protected. Run CDQAI only on an
approved computer with authorized access and approved storage. Generated reports,
dashboards, narrative companion files, caches, and logs must also stay protected.

Do not upload these materials to OpenAI, other AI services, GitHub, public websites,
or unapproved services. Do not paste real records, narratives, identifiers,
connection settings, logs, or screenshots containing protected information into
an AI chat. Review real-data results locally yourself. An AI assistant should
work only with application code, sanitized documentation, and fabricated examples.

This guide does not grant permission to access or share crash data. Follow your
organization's data-access and handling requirements.


1. FIND THE CORRECT PROJECT FOLDER

Open the working CDQAI folder in Windows File Explorer. Use the installation
provided by the project owner, not a different download or GitHub clone.

The folder should contain:
  Run_CDQAI.bat       The normal launcher
  .venv              The project's Python environment
  config             Configuration files
  cdqai              Application code
  outputs            Generated reports
  logs               Run logs

The private configuration is config\config.yaml. It tells the program where to
find the approved data and where to save results. Preserve an existing working
configuration. Do not replace it with the example configuration.

If .venv or config\config.yaml is missing, see section 6 before a real-data run.


2. OPTIONAL: TRY A PRACTICE RUN FIRST

The practice run uses 128 fabricated records. It does not read the private
configuration, query a crash database, or read existing crash-data caches.
It does not download or run the narrative embedding model.

To open PowerShell in the project folder:
  a. Open the CDQAI folder in File Explorer.
  b. Click the address bar at the top of the window.
  c. Type powershell and press Enter.

In the PowerShell window, copy the following command and press Enter:

  .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m cdqai.main --smoke-test

Wait for the completion message. Then open this file in File Explorer:

  outputs\smoke\dashboard.html

This is a practice dashboard, not real findings. Its companion file,
dashboard_narratives.js, must remain in the same folder.

Practice results stay in outputs\smoke and do not replace the normal reports.
A successful practice run checks basic processing and reporting, but does not
prove that database access or the full narrative model is ready.


3. RUN CDQAI WITH THE APPROVED LOCAL CONFIGURATION

Before starting:
  - Confirm that you are authorized to use the configured data.
  - Have the project owner confirm the configuration and model files are ready.
  - If the run needs SQL Server, use the approved network/VPN and Windows account.
  - Close CDQAI output CSV files in Excel so they can be updated.
  - Keep an approved local copy of previous results if you need to retain them.
    A new run can replace files with the same names in the output folder.

Double-click Run_CDQAI.bat in the CDQAI folder.

A command window will open and show progress. Leave it open while the program
runs. A full run can take substantial time; it may process the entire dataset.
Do not start another run at the same time.

The program normally reuses its existing merged-data and embedding caches when
enabled. This means a normal run does not necessarily fetch the newest database
records. Ask the project owner when data should be refreshed.

When the launcher reports successful completion, press a key to close its window.
If it reports failure, use section 7. Do not assume an existing dashboard belongs
to the latest attempt; it may be left over from an earlier run.

Alternative for users already working in PowerShell in the project folder:

  .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m cdqai.main --run-all

This command runs the same full pipeline as the batch launcher. It is not a
small practice run.


4. VIEW AND INTERPRET THE RESULTS

Expanded findings include recorded triggers, fields worth checking, and a
"Why this priority?" explanation. An optional Local Llama review draft is separate
from the original explanation; it does not change scores or evidence. It is off
until the project owner configures a local-only Ollama model. See
docs\ANALYST_GUIDANCE.md for setup and the crash-severity priority settings.

Treat generated suggestions as unverified review aids. Field comparisons show
observed unusual values, not proof of what caused a model score. If crash severity
shows "unknown", ask the project owner to check the severity-column mapping.

With the default configuration, open:

  outputs\dashboard.html

If the project owner configured a different output folder, use that location.
The dashboard opens in a web browser as a local file. Do not publish it online.
Keep dashboard_narratives.js beside it; this companion contains narrative text.

Start with the highest-priority findings. Expand a finding with its + button
to inspect available narrative evidence. Compare the explanation and suggested
follow-up with the authorized source record before deciding whether a correction
is needed. An unusual record can still be accurate.

Useful files in the same output folder include:
  top_findings.csv          Highest-priority review queue
  actionable_findings.csv   Findings requiring substantive analyst review
  findings.csv              All synthesized findings
  evidence.csv              Supporting rule and model evidence
  annual_findings.csv       Annual findings summary
  model_scores.csv          Record-level model scores

CSV files can be opened in Excel for authorized local review. Close them before
the next run. Keep analyst notes separately in an approved location because
generated files may be overwritten. Do not upload reports or dashboard files.


5. USING VS CODE (OPTIONAL)

VS Code is useful for development but is not required for the batch launcher.

  a. In VS Code, choose File > Open Folder and select the working CDQAI folder.
  b. If needed, install the Microsoft Python extension through your approved
     software-installation process.
  c. Press Ctrl+Shift+P and choose Python: Select Interpreter.
  d. Select .venv\Scripts\python.exe inside this CDQAI folder.
  e. Choose Terminal > New Terminal. Use a PowerShell terminal at the project root.
  f. Run the practice command from section 2, or the full-run command from section 3.

You do not need to activate the environment when using the explicit Python
executable path shown in this guide. For real-data runs, use a terminal you
control directly; do not ask an AI assistant to run or capture the output.


6. FIRST-TIME SETUP (PROJECT OWNER OR IT ASSISTANCE RECOMMENDED)

Skip environment creation if the existing .venv works. Do not recreate a working
installation merely to follow these steps.

For a new installation, use Python 3.11. Open PowerShell in the CDQAI folder and
run these commands one at a time:

  py -3.11 -m venv .venv
  .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
  .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m pip check

Dependency installation may need internet access. Have IT arrange approved
software and model downloads before running on protected inputs. The full
narrative model may otherwise attempt a download when its files are absent.

If config\config.yaml does not exist, copy config\config.example.yaml to that
name. Have the project owner enter approved local settings. The example's
database placeholders will not connect to a real database. Never overwrite
an existing private config, and never copy private settings back into the example.

SQL access also requires the configured Microsoft SQL Server ODBC driver and
the appropriate network/account permissions. Ask IT if these are unavailable.

Optional configuration check, run privately:

  .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m cdqai.main --health-check

This checks configuration loading and runtime directories. It does not test
SQL connectivity or prove the embedding model is available.

Run the fabricated practice test from section 2 before a full run.
Developers can also run the automated test suite:

  .\.venv\Scripts\python.exe -m pytest

For more setup detail, see docs\DEVELOPMENT.md.


7. COMMON PROBLEMS

"Python virtual environment not found" or Python executable cannot be found:
  Check that you opened the intended working CDQAI folder. If .venv is missing
  or broken, ask the project owner or IT to complete section 6.

PowerShell cannot find the command or file:
  Confirm the terminal is in the folder containing Run_CDQAI.bat. Copy the full
  command, including the initial .\ characters.

"No module named ...":
  A dependency is missing, or the wrong Python was selected. Use the explicit
  .venv\Scripts\python.exe path. Have the project owner repair dependencies.

SQL connection, login, driver, or table error:
  Ask the project owner or IT to check the local configuration, ODBC driver,
  account permissions, and network/VPN. Do not upload the error or configuration
  to an AI service; it may contain protected connection or data details.

Access denied while writing a report:
  Close output files in Excel and other programs, then retry. If it continues,
  ask IT to check write permissions and file locks in the approved output folder.

Automated tests cannot use the Windows temporary folder:
  A developer can choose a NEW, unused temporary directory under outputs with
  pytest's --basetemp option. Do not point this option at an existing report or
  data folder: pytest may clear the directory it is given.

Narratives do not appear in the dashboard:
  Check that dashboard_narratives.js is beside dashboard.html. Some records
  genuinely have no narrative; the fabricated practice data includes that case.

Results seem old:
  Verify the last run completed successfully. Normal runs can reuse caches.
  Ask the project owner about a controlled refresh. Do not add --refresh-cache
  casually: it rebuilds caches and may start a lengthy database/model operation.

The program stops or reports failure:
  Review the newest file in logs locally with authorized project staff.
  Do not upload logs, protected outputs, or screenshots to OpenAI or GitHub.
  For external help, describe the symptom without actual data or private settings.


FOR PROJECT MAINTAINERS

Publish reviewed source code and sanitized documentation only. Keep the real
config, inputs, caches, logs, and outputs private. See GIT_SETUP.md for the
publication checks. This guide contains no real crash records or credentials.
